five hours drive out of adelaide
paleontologist jim gilling is travelling
to see some of the rarest and most
ancient fossils in the world
we're going to a secret location in the
Flinders Ranges
this site is so valuable that we have to
actually be very careful about who we
take in there and Hoover actually finds
out about it we're going to see one of
the most fantastic things it's the place
where you can get a look at the very
first fossil evidence of complex life on
earth the area Jim is visiting was once
in the ocean 600 million years ago
that's the only place where life could
be found for a billion years all that
the earth had seen of microscopic
single-celled creatures the best they
could do was to form these domes of
slime which we call stromatolites
stromatolites were Earth's dominant life
form where it not for the violent
climatic changes triggered by volcanoes
at the end of the snowball they might
still rule the planet today within a
short time after the end of the snowball
we see a revolution in the history of
life the first clue was that microscopic
life suddenly gets very much largely
getting large spiny single-celled
creatures and then for the first time
you get these really truly bizarre
creatures which we believe are the
oldest multi-celled creatures the
Ediacaran fossils the Ediacaran x' maybe
the most important leap forward in the
history of life on earth but that
doesn't mean they're easy to spot so
here you can see a specimen of dick and
Sonya this mat like creature is
preserved underneath this massive layer
of sand and you see these structures
here if I press this putty then we can
get an image of what the creature
actually looked like you can see the
edges of the segments you can see the
tips of the segments
Dickenson eeeh who to over a metre long
it's thought they lived on the sea floor
soaking up nutrients through their skin
what we're saying is a window on the
preservation of these earliest animals
we've seen the evidence for the snowball
earth this climatic event which preceded
the Ediacaran period and then the
changes since in environment seem to
have led up to the evolution of these
large creatures the first that we see on
earth these are the creatures that gave
rise to their life that we know today
the Ediacaran were a gigantic
evolutionary leap forward